README.md, before:

# P3 Compiler

A Domain-Specific Language (DSL) compiler for defining podcast object models and their relationships. The P3 language provides a simple, UML-inspired syntax for modeling podcast domain objects, which the compiler translates into source code and database schemas.

## Overview

The P3 (Podcast Project Programming) language enables you to define data types, relationships, and constraints for podcast domains using an expressive, type-safe syntax. The compiler generates:

- **C++ classes** with proper inheritance hierarchies
- **SQLite database schemas** with foreign key relationships

Future targets include additional programming languages and SQL dialects.

## Language Features

### Type System

- **Implicit Base Type**: All user-defined types automatically inherit from the built-in `Fabric` base type, which provides common metadata fields (typeId, creationDate, modificationDate, comment)
- **User-Defined Types**: Define custom types using the `fabric` keyword
- **Inheritance**: Support for single inheritance with the `: BaseType` syntax
- **Primitive Types**: String, Int, Real, Timestamp, Timespan, Date, Guid
- **Enumerations**: Define enums for categorical values
- **Case-Insensitive**: Keywords and type names are case-insensitive

### Relationships

- One-to-one relationships
- One-to-many relationships (using arrays)
- Many-to-many relationships

### Field Modifiers

Field cardinality and constraints are specified using square bracket notation:

- `[1]` - Mandatory single value
- `[0..1]` - Optional single value
- `[1..*]` - Array with at least one element
- `[0..*]` - Array that may be empty
- `[unique]` - Unique constraint
- Modifiers can be combined: `[1,unique]`

### Design Philosophy

P3 is inspired by UML class diagrams but deliberately simplified. It focuses on data modeling without the complexity of visibility modifiers, abstract types, interfaces, or stereotypes. The goal is an expressive yet approachable language for domain modeling.

## Example

```p3
// Define an enumeration
enum MediaType {
    AUDIO,
    VIDEO
}

// Define a base type
fabric Asset {
    Guid id[1];
    String url[1];
}

// Define a derived type with inheritance
fabric AudioAsset : Asset {
    String format[1];
    Int fileSize[1];
}

// Define a type with relationships
fabric Podcast {
    Guid id[1];
    String title[1];
    String description[1];
    String author[0..1];         // optional field
    String rssUrl[1,unique];     // mandatory + unique
    Episode episodes[0..*];      // one-to-many relationship
}

fabric Episode {
    Guid id[1];
    String title[1];
    Date publishedAt[1];
    Timespan duration[1];
    MediaType mediaType[1];
    AudioAsset audio[1];         // one-to-one relationship
    Transcript transcript[0..1]; // optional one-to-one
}

fabric Transcript {
    Guid id[1];
    String text[1];
    String language[1];
}
```

## Prerequisites

- CMake 3.20 or higher
- C11-compatible compiler (GCC or Clang)
- Flex 2.6+ (lexical analyzer generator)
- Bison 3.8+ (parser generator)
- Ninja (build system)

### Installing Prerequisites

**macOS:**

```bash
brew install cmake flex bison ninja
```

**Ubuntu/Debian:**

```bash
sudo apt-get install cmake flex bison gcc ninja-build
```

## Building

```bash
# Create build directory
mkdir _build
cd _build

# Configure with CMake and Ninja
cmake -G Ninja ..

# Build
ninja

# Clean
ninja clean
```

## Usage

```bash
./p3c <source_file.p3>
```

Example:

```bash
./p3c ../examples/podcast.p3
```

## Project Structure

```text
p3-compiler/
├── CMakeLists.txt          # CMake build configuration
├── README.md               # This file
├── AGENTS.md               # AI agent operating instructions
├── src/
│   ├── lexer.l            # Flex lexer specification
│   ├── parser.y           # Bison parser specification
│   └── main.c             # Main entry point
├── include/               # Header files
├── examples/              # Example P3 programs
│   └── podcast.p3         # Podcast domain model example
└── _build/                # Build artifacts (gitignored)
```

## Compilation Phases

The P3 compiler implements a multi-phase compilation process:

1. **Lexical Analysis** - Tokenizes the input source code
2. **Syntax Analysis** - Parses tokens into an abstract syntax tree
3. **Semantic Analysis** - Type checking and validation (planned)
4. **Code Generation** - Generates target code (planned):
   - C++ class definitions with inheritance
   - SQLite database schema with foreign keys

## Type Mappings

| P3 Type | C++ | SQLite |
|---------|-----|--------|
| String | std::string | TEXT |
| Int | int64_t | INTEGER |
| Real | double | REAL |
| Timestamp | double | REAL |
| Timespan | double | REAL |
| Guid | std::string | TEXT |

## Current Status

**Implemented:**

- Lexical analysis with case-insensitive keywords
- Syntax analysis supporting full P3 grammar
- Enum declarations
- Fabric type declarations with inheritance
- Field modifiers (cardinality and constraints)
- All primitive types

**Planned:**

- Semantic analysis (type checking, inheritance validation)
- C++ code generation
- SQLite schema generation
- Additional target languages and SQL dialects

## Language Specification

### Keywords

- `fabric` - Define a new type
- `enum` - Define an enumeration
- `static` - Static field modifier
- `unique` - Unique constraint modifier

### Primitive Types

- `String` - Text strings
- `Int` - Integer numbers
- `Real` - Floating-point numbers
- `Timestamp` - Points in time (seconds since epoch)
- `Timespan` - Durations (in seconds)
- `Date` - Calendar dates
- `Guid` - Globally unique identifier (for both type and instance identification)

### Comments

```p3
// Single-line comment

/*
   Multi-line comment
*/
```

## Contributing

This is a personal project for experimenting with domain-specific language design and compiler implementation. See AGENTS.md for development guidelines and project decisions.

## License

TBD

## Author

Heiko

Commit message:

docs: rebrand from P3 to BBFM project
- rename file extension from .p3 to .bbfm
- update all documentation to reflect BBFM context
- clarify project as part of Big Bad Feed Machine
- update AST output header to BBFM Program AST
- mark p3c binary name as deprecated in gitignore

README.md, after:

# Model Compiler

A Domain-Specific Language (DSL) compiler for defining podcast object models and their relationships. Part of the Big Bad Feed Machine (BBFM) project, this compiler provides common infrastructure for podcast-related applications. The modeling language provides a simple, UML-inspired syntax for modeling podcast domain objects, which the compiler translates into source code and database schemas.

## Overview

The BBFM modeling language enables you to define data types, relationships, and constraints for podcast domains using an expressive, type-safe syntax. The compiler generates:

- **C++ classes** with proper inheritance hierarchies
- **SQLite database schemas** with foreign key relationships

Future targets include additional programming languages and SQL dialects.

## Language Features

### Type System

- **Implicit Base Type**: All user-defined types automatically inherit from the built-in `Fabric` base type, which provides common metadata fields (typeId, creationDate, modificationDate, comment)
- **User-Defined Types**: Define custom types using the `fabric` keyword
- **Inheritance**: Support for single inheritance with the `: BaseType` syntax
- **Primitive Types**: String, Int, Real, Timestamp, Timespan, Date, Guid
- **Enumerations**: Define enums for categorical values
- **Case-Insensitive**: Keywords and type names are case-insensitive

### Relationships

- One-to-one relationships
- One-to-many relationships (using arrays)
- Many-to-many relationships

### Field Modifiers

Field cardinality and constraints are specified using square bracket notation:

- `[1]` - Mandatory single value
- `[0..1]` - Optional single value
- `[1..*]` - Array with at least one element
- `[0..*]` - Array that may be empty
- `[unique]` - Unique constraint
- Modifiers can be combined: `[1,unique]`

### Design Philosophy

The BBFM modeling language is inspired by UML class diagrams but deliberately simplified. It focuses on data modeling without the complexity of visibility modifiers, abstract types, interfaces, or stereotypes. The goal is an expressive yet approachable language for domain modeling.

## Example

```bbfm
// Define an enumeration
enum MediaType {
    AUDIO,
    VIDEO
}

// Define a base type
fabric Asset {
    Guid id[1];
    String url[1];
}

// Define a derived type with inheritance
fabric AudioAsset : Asset {
    String format[1];
    Int fileSize[1];
}

// Define a type with relationships
fabric Podcast {
    Guid id[1];
    String title[1];
    String description[1];
    String author[0..1];         // optional field
    String rssUrl[1,unique];     // mandatory + unique
    Episode episodes[0..*];      // one-to-many relationship
}

fabric Episode {
    Guid id[1];
    String title[1];
    Date publishedAt[1];
    Timespan duration[1];
    MediaType mediaType[1];
    AudioAsset audio[1];         // one-to-one relationship
    Transcript transcript[0..1]; // optional one-to-one
}

fabric Transcript {
    Guid id[1];
    String text[1];
    String language[1];
}
```

## Prerequisites

- CMake 3.20 or higher
- C++23-compatible compiler (GCC or Clang)
- Flex 2.6+ (lexical analyzer generator)
- Bison 3.8+ (parser generator)
- Ninja (build system)

### Installing Prerequisites

**macOS:**

```bash
brew install cmake flex bison ninja
```

**Ubuntu/Debian:**

```bash
sudo apt-get install cmake flex bison gcc ninja-build
```

## Building

```bash
# Create build directory
mkdir _build
cd _build

# Configure with CMake and Ninja
cmake -G Ninja ..

# Build
ninja

# Clean
ninja clean
```

## Usage

```bash
./model-compiler <source_file.bbfm>
```

Example:

```bash
./model-compiler ../examples/podcast.bbfm
```

## Project Structure

```text
model-compiler/
├── CMakeLists.txt          # CMake build configuration
├── README.md               # This file
├── AGENTS.md               # AI agent operating instructions
├── src/
│   ├── model-compiler.l   # Flex lexer specification
│   ├── model-compiler.y   # Bison parser specification
│   ├── Driver.cpp         # Compiler driver implementation
│   ├── AST.cpp            # AST implementation
│   └── main.cpp           # Main entry point (C++)
├── include/               # Header files
│   ├── Common.h           # Common macros and utilities
│   ├── Driver.h           # Compiler driver interface
│   └── AST.h              # AST node definitions
├── examples/              # Example programs
│   └── podcast.bbfm       # Podcast domain model example
└── _build/                # Build artifacts (gitignored)
```

## Compilation Phases

The compiler implements a multi-phase compilation process:

1. **Lexical Analysis** - Tokenizes the input source code
2. **Syntax Analysis** - Parses tokens into an abstract syntax tree
3. **AST Construction** - Builds complete Abstract Syntax Tree
4. **Semantic Analysis** - Type checking and validation (planned)
5. **Code Generation** - Generates target code (planned):
   - C++ class definitions with inheritance
   - SQLite database schema with foreign keys

## Type Mappings

| BBFM Type | C++ | SQLite |
|---------|-----|--------|
| String | std::string | TEXT |
| Int | int64_t | INTEGER |
| Real | double | REAL |
| Timestamp | double | REAL |
| Timespan | double | REAL |
| Guid | std::string | TEXT |

## Current Status

**Implemented:**

- Lexical analysis with case-insensitive keywords
- Syntax analysis supporting full grammar
- AST construction with modern C++23
- Enum declarations
- Fabric type declarations with inheritance
- Field modifiers (cardinality and constraints)
- All primitive types
- Optional field shorthand syntax (?)

**Planned:**

- Semantic analysis (type checking, inheritance validation)
- C++ code generation
- SQLite schema generation
- Additional target languages and SQL dialects

## Language Specification

### Keywords

- `fabric` - Define a new type
- `enum` - Define an enumeration
- `static` - Static field modifier
- `unique` - Unique constraint modifier

### Primitive Types

- `String` - Text strings
- `Int` - Integer numbers
- `Real` - Floating-point numbers
- `Timestamp` - Points in time (seconds since epoch)
- `Timespan` - Durations (in seconds)
- `Date` - Calendar dates
- `Guid` - Globally unique identifier (for both type and instance identification)

### Comments

```bbfm
// Single-line comment

/*
   Multi-line comment
*/
```

## Contributing

This is a personal project for experimenting with domain-specific language design and compiler implementation. See AGENTS.md for development guidelines and project decisions.

## License

TBD

## Author

Heiko
